Let's now zoom in into the FilterChainProxy.
The SecurityFilterChain proxy manages SecurityFilterChains.
When it receives a request,
it iterates through all the SecurityFilterChains in order to
find the one that matches the request.
It then requests that filter chain to perform the security checks.
Hence, in this example, if the request was /admin,
then the second chain would be invoked.
Order is key here.
You have to make sure that the higher SecurityFilterChain
mappers do not overlap with lower ones.
Otherwise, your request might not reach the desired chain.
Generally though,
you would only have one SecurityFilterChain in your application.
But if you do want variety in your authentication strategies,
say for example /admin would use digest and the remainder of
the application to use basic authentication,
then setting up two filter chains will do the job.
If we take a look at the filter chain interface,
you can see that there are two methods.
The first is the matches method,
and this will check if the request matches the criteria
for that particular SecurityFilterChain.
And the second one retrieves the filters associated with the chain,
which will perform the security checks on the request.
Let's take a look at a filter chain and see how
authentication requests are handled.
There are many filters that do a multitude of security tasks.
We won't have time to cover all of them, but we will cover some of the key ones.
One of the first key filters a request might encounter is
the SecurityContextPersistenceFilter.
It is responsible for managing the security context.
The security context holds the details of the authenticated principal,
like a user, things like their usernames,
roles, and any type of identification details.
It first tries to retrieve the security context from
a Security Context repository.
In your typical web application,
that would be the session using an HTTP session repository.
In this case, we haven't authenticated previously,
so it will add an empty security context to the SecurityContextHolder.
The holder is a thread local,
making the security context available to all subsequent
security filters and your application that are running in
the same thread of execution.
The request will then eventually be intercepted by an AuthenticationFilter.
Now there are many ways to authenticate a request,
and hence, there are many different flavors of the AuthenticationFilter,
from basic, digest, OpenID, just to name a few.
You can also create your own custom AuthenticationFilters.
Once the authentication is successful,
the filter places the authenticated principal into the security context so
that all future requests don't need to re- authenticate,
unless, of course, the session expires or the user logs out.
Next, the request might hit the AnonymousAuthenticationFilter.
If at this stage the security context still hasn't been
updated with an authentication object,
it will add an anonymous authentication object to the security context.
Two other key filters are the
ExceptionTranslationFilter and FilterSecurityInterceptor.
The interceptor performs authorization.
In a web application,
it will check if the authenticated principal has
permissions to access a particular HTTP resource.
And it can throw either an authentication or authorization exception,
which will then be caught and handled by the ExceptionTranslationFilter.
The ExceptionTranslationFilter might then redirect the client to an
error page or a logging page or update the header or content type to
inform the client that they need to authenticate or that they do not
have permission to access the resource.
Now let's take a quick look at the interface of the security context.
It's quite simple really, just two methods,
to set and retrieve the Authentication object.
Like many things in Spring,
the context can be extended and updated to add features
that you require to be stored for authentication and authorization in your application.